---
layout: post
title:  Three-dimensional Human-computer Interaction Model Design for Chinese Pronunciation
# 汉语发音的三维人机交互型模型设计

date: 2021-04-01 21:01:00
description: Three-dimensional Human-computer Interaction Model Design for Chinese Pronunciation
tags: Human-Computer-Interaction
# categories: acadamic-research
featured: false
toc:
  sidebar: left
---

## Project Background
In the context of the global outbreak of the COVID-19 virus, the development of artificial intelligence in the field of education is gaining momentum, and online teaching is gradually becoming a learning method that everyone is willing to accept. The new teaching method also poses new challenges to the traditional classroom teaching model. Traditional classroom pronunciation teaching mainly relies on teachers to demonstrate specific actions through language, teaching aids, or body, allowing students to comprehend on their own. This teaching method is highly ambiguous and difficult to meet the needs of online teaching and computer-assisted pronunciation teaching feedback.

In terms of pronunciation teaching, in the absence of teaching aids and face-to-face demonstration and guidance from teachers, how to allow learners to quickly understand the essentials of phonetics learning and carry out effective imitation learning has become the direction of thinking for phonetics teachers under the new situation.

In recent years, computer-assisted pronunciation teaching technology (CAPT) has begun to be applied in pronunciation teaching online platforms, and various attempts have been made to better give learners feedback on pronunciation problems. Feedback on pronunciation scores through GOP (Goodness of pronunciation) can help learners to a certain extent to recognize the pros and cons of their pronunciation. For example, feedback on pronunciation problems in the form of pronunciation attributes can make learners more clearly recognize where their pronunciation problems are and how to correct them. However, without the on-site guidance of the teacher, through textual descriptions or overly professional guidance methods, learners find it difficult to capture changes in key pronunciation parts, and even cannot understand the specific designation of various parts of the oral cavity, making it difficult to produce correct pronunciation.

In terms of pronunciation phonetics research, some scholars have tracked the movement trajectories of the lips and tongue using EMA to obtain the lip and tongue dynamic data of each phoneme. From the perspective of pronunciation feedback, this method can reflect the oral changes of the target phoneme in a relatively intuitive way. However, the cost and difficulty of data collection and analysis in this way are high. The main manifestations are that the need to stick sensors to the specific positions of the speaker's pronunciation organs will bring a strong discomfort to the speaker and affect the naturalness of pronunciation; the sensor electrodes fall off, which may cause data collection failure or inaccurate collection; the number of sensor electrodes is limited, and data modeling may face data sparsity and other problems. And the pronunciation data obtained in this way is difficult to analyze, and it is difficult to meet the flexible needs of pronunciation teaching.

<!-- Many Chinese language learners have incorrect pronunciation mastery and do not know how to use the correct oral parts to pronounce. It is difficult for teachers to help students use the correct oral parts to pronounce one-on-one in teaching. It is particularly important to visualize the pronunciation process through software. The visualization of the pronunciation process refers to the vivid display of the movement of the pronunciation organs during the pronunciation process. The visualization of the pronunciation process can be applied in many fields. For example, in the field of language learning, spreading Chinese to the world meets the strategic needs of the country and is an important way to enhance the country's "soft power". The Confucius Institute has set up many Confucius classrooms around the world, but it is still difficult to meet the needs of more than 40 million overseas Chinese learners. The gap in teaching resources is huge and visual synthetic speech has been proven to be more valuable than auditory synthetic speech and is more easily accepted by learners. In addition, in the field of speech correction, there are tens of millions of speech disorder patients in our country. The technology of visualizing the pronunciation process can help patients better correct their speech through visual feedback. For language learners, understanding the movement of pronunciation organs such as lips, upper and lower jaws, and tongue during pronunciation has guiding significance for improving language learning effectiveness. -->

<!-- 许多汉语学习者对于发音掌握不正确，不知道如何采用正确的口腔部位发声，老师教学上难以一对一帮助学生采用正确的口腔部位发声，通过软件将发音过程可视化显得尤为重要。
发音过程可视化是指将发音过程中发音器官的运动情况形象的展示出来。发音过程可视化可以应用在很多领域,例如语言学习领域,向世界各国传播汉语符合国家的战略需求,是增强国家"软实力"的重要途径,国家汉办已经在全球设立了多个孔子课堂,但仍然难以满足4000多万海外汉语学习者的需求,师资力量缺口巨大并且视觉合成语音被证明比听觉合成语音更有价值，更容易被学习者所接受;另外,在言语矫正领域,我国有数以千万计的言语障碍患者,发音过程可视化技术可以通过视觉反馈帮助患者更好地进行言语矫正。
对于语言学习者而言,了解发音时唇部,上下颚以及舌头等发音器官的运动状况等信息,对于提高语言的学习效果具有指导意义。 -->


> This project is based on a three-dimensional anatomical model of the human head, creating animations and designing interactions in Unity. Considering the situation where the phonetic organs inside the mouth are not fully visible or completely invisible, we start from the perspective of visualizing the phonetic organs. We construct a visualized three-dimensional virtual human head and its oral system that can generate synchronous speech animations, in order to achieve the best effect in learning phonetics.
{: .block-warning }
<!-- 
> 该项目基于人体头部解剖三维模型，在 unity 中制作 动画，设计交互，针对口腔内发音器官非完全可见或完全非可见的情况,从发音器官可视化的角度出发,构建一个可以产生同步语音动画的可视化三维虚拟人头及其口腔系统，以达到学习拼音的最佳效果。 -->
<!-- {: .block-tip } -->

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/3D/2.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/3D/1.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

## Practical Significance
In response to the situation where the articulatory organs in the oral cavity are not fully visible or completely invisible, from the perspective of articulatory visualization, a three-dimensional virtual human head and its oral system capable of producing synchronized speech animation are constructed, so that the pronunciation method of Chinese phonetic symbols can be intuitively represented by a three-dimensional animation model. This project is based on a three-dimensional human head model, using knowledge of anatomy and pronunciation visualization to create a human oral anatomical simulation speech animation.

<!-- 项目目的 -->
<!-- 针对口腔内发音器官非完全可见或完全非可见的情况,从发音器官可视化的角度出发,构建一个可以产生同步语音动画的可视化三维虚拟人头及其口腔系统，使汉语音标的发声方法得以用三维动画模型直观表示。本项目基于三维人体头部模型模型、运用解剖学以及发音可视化等方面知识制作出人体口腔解剖仿真语音动画。 -->

- Assisting in the classroom teaching of Chinese for international students studying in China. The visualization of this 3D virtual human head and its oral system through voice animation can aid teachers in classroom teaching, post-class evaluation feedback, and students' online learning. By observing the way of vocalization in the simulated image animation, it can help Chinese learners master the correct way of vocalization.
- Helping in the teaching of Chinese pronunciation for children, the vivid 3D animation helps children understand and master Chinese pronunciation. At the same time, the 3D visualization of pronunciation, language teaching, and even human-computer interaction will play a positive role in promoting, with important theoretical significance and potential application prospects.
- For people with hearing impairments, they often cannot make a sound because they cannot hear the sound and do not know how to vocalize. The 3D visualized pronunciation animation solves this problem well, allowing people with hearing impairments to see how the vocal organs make sounds.
- The language problems of children with intellectual disabilities are becoming increasingly prominent. This system can be used to guide children with hearing impairments in tongue pronunciation position training. To overcome the invisibility problem in the tongue pronunciation movement process in the current language learning of children with hearing impairments, and improve the effect of pronunciation training for children with hearing impairments.
- At present, there is a lack of research on the visualization of Chinese pronunciation, especially through the visualization of three-dimensional models. Therefore, the generation of synchronized voice animation's visualized 3D virtual human head and its oral system is very important in language learning, especially in second language learning and speech correction. In addition, this system can also be extended to the visualization of pronunciation teaching in English phonetics, Japanese fifty-sound chart, and so on.

<!-- - 辅助来华留学生汉语课堂教学。该语音动画的可视化三维虚拟人头及其口腔系统可以辅助教师课堂教学、课下评测反馈以及学生线上学习，通过观察模拟图像动画的发声方式可以达到帮助汉语学习者掌握正确的发声方式的效果
- 帮助儿童汉语发音教学，形象的三维动画有助于儿童理解与掌握汉语发音。同时，对于发音的3D可视化、语言教学乃至人机交互都将起到积极的推进作用,具有重要的理论意义和潜在的应用前景
- 对于有听力障碍的人群，往往由于听不到声音而不知道如何发声从而导致发不出声，三维可视化发音动画便很好的解决了该问题，让听力障碍人群可以看到发声器官如何发声
- 智力障碍儿童语言问题日趋突出,该系统可以应用于引导听障儿童进行舌部发音位置训练。以克服目前听障儿童语言学习中舌部发音运动过程中不可视的问题，提高听障儿童发音训练的效果
- 目前,在对中文发音可视化研究方面存在欠缺,尤其是通过三维模型的可视化方面,因此产生同步语音动画的可视化三维虚拟人头及其口腔系统在语言学习,特别是第二语言学习及言语矫正方面以及言语矫正方面有很重要的意义。此外，该系统还可延申至英语音标、日语五十音图等的发音教学可视化中。 -->

## Project Content

> Overall Goal: To construct a user-friendly, three-dimensional virtual human head and oral system that can generate synchronized voice animations.
{: .block-tip }

<!-- 总目标：构建一个人机友好型，可以产生同步语音动画的可视化三维虚拟人头及其口腔系统。 -->



> In the aspect of animation
<!-- 动画方面 -->
{: .block-warning }

- Based on the muscle movements of human oral pronunciation, construct and design three-dimensional animations of the movements of each vocal organ.
- For vocal organs such as teeth, hard palate, and lower jaw that only undergo minor deformations or even no deformation during pronunciation, consider them as rigid bodies and simulate their movements. For vocal organs such as the tongue and soft palate that undergo significant deformations during pronunciation, attempt to simulate their deformation effects. By calling the Unity toolkit, simulate the movement of special soft muscles like the tongue.
- Meanwhile, in terms of data collection, we try to visualize the Chinese pronunciation process by driving a three-dimensional physiological model with data from a Chinese Electromagnetic Articulograph (EMA).

<!-- - 以人体口腔发音的肌肉运动为依据，构造、设计各个发声器官运动的三维动画。
- 对于牙齿、硬腭以及下颚这些在发音过程中仅产生微小形变,甚至不产生形变的发音器官,将其看作刚体并进行运动模拟：而对于舌头、软腭这些在发音过程中产生大量形变的发音器官,则尝试模拟其形变效果。通过调用unity的工具包，实现舌头等特殊柔软肌肉的仿真运动。
- 同时在数据收集方面，我们尝试通过一种使用中文电磁发音记录仪(EMA)数据来驱动三维生理模型的方法来实现中文发音过程可视化方法 -->

> In the aspect of interaction design.
 <!-- 交互设计方面 -->
{: .block-warning }

- Establish a basic interactive framework. Achieve human-computer interaction effects through script programming, including the movement and rotation of the head perspective, selective semi-transparency of muscles, and other interactions.
- Optimize voice animation and interaction process. For the situation where the pronunciation organs inside the mouth are not fully visible or completely invisible, from the perspective of visualization of the pronunciation organs, better interaction design is carried out on the model so that users can more clearly observe the movement of the pronunciation parts. Optimization of interaction includes: reserving interfaces, reducing the number of control points, adding visual comparison sections for Chinese and English pronunciation, and so on.

<!-- - 建立基本交互框架。通过脚本编程达到人机交互效果，包括头部视角的移动旋转，肌肉的选择性半透明等等交互。
- 优化语音动画与交互过程。针对口腔内发音器官非完全可见或完全非可见的情况,从发音器官可视化的角度出发，对模型进行更好的交互设计使得使用者更清楚地观察到发音部位运动。优化交互包括：预留接口，减少控制点数，添加中英文发音可视化对比板块等等 -->


<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        <!-- {% include video.html path="assets/video/3D_2.mp4" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" controls=true autoplay=false %} -->
        {% include video.html path="assets/video/3D_2.mp4" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" controls=true autoplay=false %}

    </div>

</div>
<div class="caption">
    A Dynamic 3D Pronunciation Teaching Model Example
    <!-- 3D汉语教学模型示例 -->
</div>

<!-- It does also support embedding videos from different sources. Here are some examples:

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include video.html path="https://www.youtube.com/embed/jNQXAC9IVRw" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include video.html path="https://player.vimeo.com/video/524933864?h=1ac4fd9fb4&title=0&byline=0&portrait=0" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div> -->

## Innovation Description
<!-- 创新说明
1.结合了解剖学领域知识，制作发音反馈系统。使用专业的解剖学人体头部模型来进行汉语发音的模拟和教学。发音动画是基于生理解剖学三维模型制作，其中涉及到口腔内发音器官的运动模拟问题。对于牙齿、硬腭以及下颚这些在发音过程中仅产生微小形变,甚至不产生形变的发音器官,将其看作刚体并进行旋转缩放等运动来模拟：而对于舌头、软腭这些在发音过程中产生大量形变的发音器官,则采用添加FFD属性模拟其形变效果。
2. 应用场景创新。市场上基于三维人体头部解剖模型的汉语教学软件或程序几乎没有，大部分是二维的教学动画。以二维动画或者真人来模拟的方式看不见口腔内部最重要的发音器官--舌头的变化，而现在我们把解剖学的知识加入，制作友好的人机交互型汉语发音仿真系统，以达到精准仿真的效果，至今这个是没有人做过的，而且我们目前运用unity技术已经实现了基本的发声动画以及简单交互。
本项目将解剖三维动画应用于汉语教学场景实现了应用场景的创新。 -->

- Combining knowledge in the field of anatomy, a pronunciation feedback system has been developed. A professional anatomical human head model is used for the simulation and teaching of Chinese pronunciation. The pronunciation animation is based on a physiological anatomical three-dimensional model, involving the simulation of the movement of the pronunciation organs in the oral cavity. For pronunciation organs such as teeth, hard palate, and lower jaw, which only produce minor shape changes or even no shape changes during pronunciation, they are treated as rigid bodies and simulated by movements such as rotation and scaling. For pronunciation organs such as the tongue and soft palate, which produce a large amount of shape changes during pronunciation, the Free-Form Deformation (FFD) attribute is added to simulate their shape change effects.
- Innovation in application scenarios. There are almost no Chinese teaching software or programs on the market based on three-dimensional human head anatomical models, most of them are two-dimensional teaching animations. The changes in the most important pronunciation organ in the oral cavity - the tongue, cannot be seen when simulated with two-dimensional animations or real people. Now, we have incorporated knowledge of anatomy to create a user-friendly interactive Chinese pronunciation simulation system to achieve precise simulation effects. So far, no one has done this, and we have currently implemented basic vocal animations and simple interactions using Unity technology.
- This project applies anatomical three-dimensional animation to the scenario of Chinese language teaching, realizing innovation in application scenarios.